# LTA detection

This repository contains scripts for the detection and analysis of Loss-Translocation-Amplification chromothripsis events to complement the manuscript "Mechanisms underpinning osteosarcoma genome complexity and evolution" by Valle-Inclan et al. 

*   Valle-Inclan JE, De Noon S, Trevers K, Elrick H, Tanguy M, Butters T, et al. Mechanisms underpinning osteosarcoma genome complexity and evolution. bioRxiv. 2023. p. 2023.12.29.573403. doi:10.1101/2023.12.29.573403 


## Detection of LTA events 

The main characteristic of the LTA events discovered in osteosaroma is a double strand break leading to concomitant TP53 inactivation and segmental amplifications, often harbouring oncogenes. This process is mediated by unstable dicentric chromosomes and contributes to genome-wide genomic instability and the formation of highly complex karyotypes.

To detect LTA events, we  searched for connections between 17p and chromosome arms with complex genomic rearrangments (CGRs)
This allowed us to detect 64 of 68 manually identified LTA events in HGOS, the 4 missing cases had indirect connections between 17p and the resulting CGR. 

Next, we formulated criteria to look for evidence of biallelic TP53 disruption co-occurring with dicentric chromosome formation. 
For biallelic disruption, we used driver mutations identified by the HMF pipeline. In addition, we considered SV breakpoints inside TP53 and loss of heterozygocity (LOH) that indicate disruption through an SV. 

For dicentric chromosome formation, we selected events where there is loss of the terminal segment of 17p due to an SV: 

* Presence of an SV in the TP53 gene body, or a CTX or CGR in the region between start of TP53 and the centromere.
* LOH in the 17p terminal segment up to and including TP53 (minimum 75%)
   * Alternatively: LOH in >33% and presence of an amplification (minimum 1kbp of 9 copies or more)
* Absence of full chromosome LOH and chromosome arm LOH 
  * Removing cases where chromosome (arm) shows extensive LOH (>90%) and exists in a single copy number state (>90%). This removes aneuploidies but allows for extensive LOH due to rearrangements.
  * Removing all cases with full chromosome arm LOH (>99.5%) 

This filtering removes cases where gene is knockout is induced by a simple SV in a haploid chromosome arm, as well as non-specific losses of the entire 17p chromosome arm. However, it allows for cases where the terminal segment loss is obfuscated due to focal amplifications or non-specific LOH of the chromosome (arm) is present due to additional rearrangements. 


In 49 of 68 manually identified cases in HGOS, we also computationally verified LTA events with evidence of dicentric chromosome formation.

For the cases that did not pass these filters, this was often due to missing SVs leading to insufficient evidence for TP53 knockout by an SV, and absence of a CTX or CGR in 17p. Alternatively, some cases fell below the detection limit for 17p LOH of the terminal segment or instead had full 17p LOH often with additional rearrangements leading to breakpoints on 17q. Finally, for a few tumors we did observe full chr17 LOH but these were rare occurrences.



## Contribution of LTA to oncogene amplification in TCGA dataset 

To systematically detect LTA events across cancer types, we expanded the analysis to include disruption of other TSGs. For each cancer type, we used known driver TSGs for which biallelic disruption was identified in at least 10% of samples.

To focus on events that potentially provide a selective advantage to the tumor, we specifically looked for connections with chromosome arms that harbour oncogene amplifications. 



### results /remove for repo
In HGOS, 29 of 49 high-confidence LTA events were associated with oncogene amplification.

In HGOS, the 17 samples that had other TSGs affected by LTA consisted for the vast majority of samples with TP53 LTA detected (n= 12) indicating that LTA can also disrupt additional TSGs. In 7 of 12 cases we could find connections to the TP53 LTA event

Since we observed in osteosarcoma that LTA events with TP53 can also affect other TSGs, we looked for connections between the whether the CGRs involved in LTAs with other TSGs were connected to the TP53 gene region. 



## Usage

Required input generated by the HMF pipeline (https://github.com/hartwigmedical/hmftools)

* SVs from GRIDSS
* Copy number segments from PURPLE
* Driver alterations 

Additional input:

* Cohort file
* Chromosome arm coordinates

Please specify paths in the cohort file `lta_detection.conf`

Optional arguments: `show_plots=FALSE` to skip recon plots  and `dataset_selection_label='TCGA-SARC'` to subset the cohort file 

`SINGULARITYENV_R_MAX_VSIZE=80Gb
singularity exec --bind /path/to/input/ /path/to/script/structural_variation_202405_amd.sif R -e "source('/path/to/script/lta_detection.conf ');show_plots=T;dataset_selection_label='TCGA-SARC';source('/path/to/script/lta_detection.multi_tsg.R')"`

Image: https://hub.docker.com/layers/ivanbelzen/structural_variation/202405_amd/images/sha256-19b705ec12273cb4b01dcb46da378e5fb54308692772e000414c09d44a6fa23d

Also see example run script: `run_lta_detection.sh`

# References

* LTA in osteosaroma
   *   Valle-Inclan JE, De Noon S, Trevers K, Elrick H, Tanguy M, Butters T, et al. Mechanisms underpinning osteosarcoma genome complexity and evolution. bioRxiv. 2023. p. 2023.12.29.573403. doi:10.1101/2023.12.29.573403 

* ReConPlot
   *   Valle-Inclan, JE, Cortes-Ciriano I, ReConPlot: an R package for the visualization and interpretation of genomic rearrangements, Bioinformatics. 2023, doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btad719

* HMF Pipeline
   *   https://github.com/hartwigmedical/hmftools

* GRIDSS
   *   Cameron DL, Schröder J, Penington JS, Do H, Molania R, Dobrovic A, Speed TP, Papenfuss AT (2017) GRIDSS: sensitive and specific genomic rearrangement detection using positional de Bruijn graph assembly. Genome Research 27:2050–2060

* PURPLE
   * Priestley P, Baber J, Lolkema MP, Steeghs N, de Bruijn E, Shale C, et al. Pan-cancer whole-genome analyses of metastatic solid tumours. Nature. 2019;575: 210.

*  Chromosome bands retrieved from the UCSC table browser: Navarro Gonzalez J, Zweig AS, Speir ML, et al (2020) The UCSC Genome Browser database: 2021 update. Nucleic Acids Res 49:D1046–D1057

